New your task page: Ethical aspects (#1275)
elixir-europe/rdmkit: pages/your_tasks/ethics.md

---
title: Ethical aspects
contributors: [Karel Berka, Korbinian Bösl, Erin Calhoun, Paulette Lieby]
description: Working on aspects in the management of research data that can raise ethical issues
page_id: ethics
related_pages:
  tool_assembly: [covid-19, transmed, tsd, csc]
training:
- name: 'Ethics/ELSI considerations - From FAIR to fair data sharing - recorded webinar'
  registry: TeSS
  url: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/ethics-elsi-considerations-from-fair-to-fair-data-sharing
- name: 'Biomedical data: Ethical, legal and social implications - e-learning'
  registry: TeSS
  url: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/biomedical-data
- name: 'From Swab to Server: Testing, Sequencing, and Sharing During a Pandemic - free online course'
  registry: TeSS
  url: https://tess.elixir-europe.org/materials/from-swab-to-server-testing-sequencing-and-sharing-during-a-pandemic
---
​

> Ethical issues refer to moral principles and standards that guide human conduct and define what is considered right or wrong within a particular context.

Reviewer: Ethics refers to moral principles and norms that help us identify right from wrong within a particular context. Ethical issues/concerns typically arise when these principles conflict. Navigating through such concerns often requires one to compare the benefits of an action with the (harmful) consequences of doing so.

> Ethical issues refer to moral principles and standards that guide human conduct and define what is considered right or wrong within a particular context.

Author: ```suggestion
Ethics refers to moral principles and norms that help us identify right from wrong within a particular context. Ethical issues/concerns typically arise when these principles conflict. Navigating through such concerns often requires one to compare the benefits of an action with the potentially harmful consequences of doing so.
```

Reviewer 2: the sentence '... with the potentially harmful consequences of doing so'  is not clear:
`doing so` ie doing what exactly?

`Navigating through such concerns often requires one to compare the benefits of an action with its potential harmful consequences.`

> Ethics covers topics beyond the issue of personal data, compliance with legal obligations, and the collection and use of data.

Reviewer: When it comes to research involving human participants, such ethical concerns may appear when accessing, using, or sharing data of a sensitive nature, for example health or personal data.  Ethics, however, goes beyond the issue of..

Author: ```suggestion
When it comes to research involving human participants, such ethical concerns may appear when accessing, using, or sharing data of a sensitive nature, for example health or personal data. Ethics, however, goes beyond the issue of compliance with legal obligations, and the collection and use of data.
```

    * Unintentional discrimination of research participants
    * Findings about participants that are outside of the original research question(s): see [Purpose of data processing](https://commission.europa.eu/law/law-topic/data-protection/reform/rules-business-and-organisations/principles-gdpr/purpose-data-processing_en) and [Incidental findings Archives - BBMRI-ERIC](https://www.bbmri-eric.eu/elsi-topic/incidental-findings/)
​
* Other ethical questions are arising from the impact of research outcomes, including data on the interest of communities or individuals
    * Fair management of intellectual property rights - also see e.g. ABS
    * Publication of research data that might impact the reputation of communities or individuals
    * Publication of research data that might impact economical interests of  communities or individuals
    * Publication of research data that might impact security of society, communities or individuals
​
* General research ethics considerations that are also reflecting on research data, including:

>     * Examination of what data is excluded or included and of the circumstances of its collection

Reviewer: identifying the reasons justifying the exclusion/inclusion of research data in the particular context

Author: ```suggestion
    * What are the reasons justifying the exclusion/inclusion of research data in a particular context?
```

>     * Accuracy and trustworthiness of data sources

Reviewer: On the risk of being polemic - Accuracy and trustworthy are seldom absolutes and may differ across contexts. :) Maybe it could be framed as - accurate or trustworthy enough for your needs?

>     * Avoidance of bias of research data while collecting, processing, analysing or re-using data

Reviewer: How can bias in practices of research data management be identified and minimised/avoided?

    * Assessment of models and algorithms used with respect to possible bias

>     * Prevention of misinterpretation of research data

Reviewer: How can research data be misinterpreted?

Author: ```suggestion
    * Can the research data be misinterpreted?
```

>     * Prevention of withholding of research data

Reviewer: How can research data be safely shared and reused?

Author: This is more about e.g. potential censorship or trying to achieve a competitive advantage by not making data available

Reviewer: Perhaps the question could then be: What are the justifications to withhold the sharing of research data that is not subject concerns of privacy or misuse/non-sensitive research data?

>     * Prevention of manipulation and fraud of research data

Reviewer: How can one identify false, fabricated or manipulated research data?

>     * Assessment of who is excluded or included to data access and why

Reviewer: Same as line 58?

>     * Avoidance of unnecessary harm to other beings and environment

Reviewer: How can harm to other beings and the environment be identified and mitigated in a timely manner?

    * For animal research: the [Three Rs principle](https://ec.europa.eu/health/scientific_committees/opinions_layman/en/non-human-primates/glossary/tuv/three-rs-principle.htm)  
    * For data produced with Machine Learning (ML) techniques: the [recommendations from UNESCO](https://www.unesco.org/en/artificial-intelligence/recommendation-ethics), and the [DOME guidelines](https://dome-ml.org/), a product of the [ELIXIR ML focus group](https://elixir-europe.org/focus-groups/machine-learning)  
* Resources and Policies from research infrastructures
    * BBMRI ELSI Toolkit, Helpdesk and Services
    * ELIXIR ELSI Policy [ELIXIR Ethics Policy](https://zenodo.org/record/557027#.ZGtrzpFBxD8)  
* Check existing EU policies, directives and regulations
    * The [General Data Protection Regulation](https://gdprinfo.eu/)
    * The European [Clinical Trials Regulation](https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/human-regulatory/research-development/clinical-trials/clinical-trials-regulation)

> 

Reviewer: If you want to go beyond EU - to the US for example, this might be useful - https://www.hopkinsmedicine.org/institutional_review_board/hipaa_research/faq_research.html
